



                                             The  Milestones  Project:


                     A  Database  for  the  History  of  Data  Visualization



                     Michael Friendly*                Matthew Sigal                 Derek Harnanansingh



                                                       December 2, 2012



                                                              Abstract

            Methods of data visualization have evolved substantially over their history.  Some landmarks in
        this story were the first thematic maps in the 1600s, the invention of the bar chart and line graph
        in the early 1800s, and the dynamic and interactive graphics of today.  While these developments
        have been previously detailed in various written micro-histories, there has never been an attempt to
        collect a complete, macro-history in a single place for study, search or query, and even data analysis
        or graphics based on this history.
            The purpose of this chapter is threefold:  first, to introduce the reader to our solution:  an online
        resource called the Milestones Project. This web site details important events in the history of data
        visualization, and enables users to interactively travel through time to see and explore the context
        that surrounded their developments.  Secondly, we present some striking visual examples that deal
        with conveying aspects of history over time, drawn from this resource.
            Finally, the Milestones database will be used to showcase how such a resource can serve as "data"
        for statistical historiography, which entails the use of statistical and graphical methods for the analysis
        and understanding of historical innovations, developments, and trends.



1      Introduction



If you would understand anything, observe its beginning and its development.                   _Aristotle


     Questions regarding the history of data visualization are (or at least should be) of great importance
to  historians  of  science,  to  current  developers  of  graphical  methods  for  statistical  analysis  and  the
related info-vis community, as well those just interested in the history of ideas.  In the history of science,
diagrams, graphs, maps and other visualizations have often played important roles in discoveries that
arguably might not have been achieved otherwise.1  At the same time, in the fields of statistical graphics
and information visualization,  developers often create "new" methods without any appreciation that
they have deep roots in the past.2
   _________________________________________________________*
     This work was supported by Grant OGP0138748 from the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada to Michael Friendly.  We are grateful to Dan Denis, Antoine de Falguerolles, Stephen Stigler, Ben Shneiderman
and Howard Wainer for constructive comments on this chapter.
    1Some salient examples are:  Francis Galton's 1861 discovery of anti-cyclonic movement of wind around low-pressure

areas from contour maps; Edward Maunder's "butterfly diagram" of the variation of sunspots over time leading to the
discovery of the "Maunder minimum," from 1645-1715; and Henry Moselely's 1913 discovery of the concept of atomic
number, based largely on graphical analysis (a plot of serial numbers of the elements vs.  square root of frequencies from
their X-ray spectra).
    2For example, mosaic displays for frequency tables were thought to have been invented by Hartigan and Kleiner (1981)

and extended to show the pattern of residuals in loglinear models by Friendly (1994).  But it turns out that the essential
idea behind this area-based display goes back to Georg von Mayr in 1877 (Friendly, 2002a).



                                                                   1
     These two perspectives provided the motivation for the development of the Milestones Project.  This

stemmed from the fact that historical accounts of events, ideas and techniques that relate inter alia to
modern data visualization were fragmented and scattered across a wide number of fields.3

     When this work began in the mid-1990s, there were no accounts or resources that spanned the entire
development  of  visual  thinking  and  the  visual  representation  of  data  across  different  disciplines  and
perspectives.  The Milestones Project began simply as an attempt to collate these diverse contributions
into  a  single,  comprehensive  listing,  organized  chronologically,  that  contained  representative  images,
references to original sources, and links to further discussion_ a source for "one-stop shopping" on the
history of data visualization.

     In Section 2, we describe the evolution and structure of the Milestones Project.  Section 3 presents
some historical and modern approaches to one self-referential question:  how can data visualization be
applied to its own history?  Section 4 introduces another self-referential topic we call statistical histori-
ography, which entails the use of statistical and graphical methods for the analysis and understanding
of historical innovations, developments, and trends.  But first we give some brief vignettes of historical
topics and questions for which the Milestones Project has proved invaluable in our own research.



1.1      The first statistical graph


In the history of statistical graphics (Friendly, 2008a), as in other artful sciences, there are a number
of  inventions  and  developments  that  can  be  considered  "firsts"  in  these  fields.   The  catalog  of  the
Milestones Project (Friendly and Denis, 2001) lists 70 events that can be considered to be the initial
use or statement of an idea, method or technique that is now commonplace, but there is probably no
question more fundamental than that of the first visual representation of statistical data.

     In Friendly et al. (2010) we argue that the 1-dimensional line graph shown in Figure 1 by Michael
Florent van Langen (van Langren, 1644) should be accorded this honour.  The graph shows 12 estimates
of  the  distance  in  longitude  between  Toledo  (located  at  lat/long  (+39.86   O N,  -4.03  O W))  and  Rome
(located  at  (+41.89   O N,  +12.5  O W)).  The  figure,  which  has  been  re-scaled,  and  overlaid  on  a  modern
map of Europe, makes clear what van Langren wished to communicate:  that these estimates were all
subject to large errors and to propose to King Phillip of Spain that only he had a sufficiently precise
method  for  the  determination  of  longitude  for  navigation  at  sea.   By  also  including  markers  (stars)
on the map itself,  the present version also demonstrates to the reader the extent to which all  of the
estimates were biased.



         Figure 1:  van Langren's 1644 graph, re-scaled and overlaid on a modern map of Europe.



     The telling of van Langren's story not only turned out to involve astronomy, archival research, the
history of patronage in the 17th century, and even an unsolved problem of cryptography, but also serves
as an example of statistical historiography.  The Milestones Project provided the infrastructure for this
research - through the use of a time-based, cross-referenced catalog of images, references and links to
related work, van Langren's tale was able to be studied and reported upon.
   _________________________________________________________3
     Among these are general histories in the fields of probability (Hald, 1990), statistics (Pearson, 1978, Porter, 1986,
Stigler, 1986), astronomy (Riddell, 1980), cartography (Wallis and Robinson, 1987).  More specialized accounts focus on
the early history of graphic recording (Hoff and Geddes, 1959, 1962), statistical graphs (Funkhouser, 1936, 1937, Royston,
1970, Tilling, 1975),  fitting equations to empirical data (Farebrother, 1999),  cartography (Friis, 1974, Kruskal, 1977),
thematic mapping (Friendly and Palsky, 2007, Palsky, 1996, Robinson, 1982), and so forth.



                                                                   2
1.2      Who invented the scatterplot?


Although there are earlier precursors, the main graphical methods used today_ pie charts, line graphs
and bar charts_ are generally attributed to William Playfair in works around the beginning of the 19th
century (Playfair, 1786, 1801).  All of these are essentially univariate displays of some aspect of a single
variable.

     A logical next step would be to invent a method to reveal the relationship between two variables_
what we now know as the scatterplot.  By 1886, Francis Galton had utilized this truly bivariate display,
which led to the discovery of correlation and regression, and ultimately to much of present multivariate
statistics.  However, he was not the first to use this graphical technique, and it is surprising that no one
is widely credited with its invention.

     In Friendly and Denis (2005), we delved into this mystery.  This involved tracing the early origins of
ideas related to the scatterplot, which led to two compelling narratives:  how, in Playfair's time, it was
nearly impossible to think about and visualize bivariate relationships; and, later, how the scatterplot
was essential for Galton's visual insights that would lead to the rise of modern statistics and graphics.
It was the resources available in the Milestones Project that allowed us to focus upon the events in this
period and attribute the essential ideas of the scatterplot to J. F. W. Herschel in two 1832 papers.



1.3      The Golden Age of statistical graphics


In our initial web presentation of the Milestones Project, it proved convenient to sub-divide the history
of data visualization into epochs, each of which turned out to be describable by coherent themes.  As
we illustrate later, one period turned out to be particularly noteworthy, both for the sheer number of
contributions,  and for the beauty and elegance of their execution.  We call this period,  from roughly
1850 to 1900 ( 10), the Golden Age of statistical graphics (Friendly, 2008b).

     Figure  2  shows  the  time  distribution  of  the  260  significant  events  that  had  been  included  in  the
Milestones Project database by 2007, demarcated by the labels we used for epochs.  The density estimate
is based on n = 260 significant events in the history of data of data visualization from 1500-present.The
developments in the highlighted period, from roughly 1840-1910 comprise the Golden Age of statistical
graphics.  In Friendly (2008b), we traced the origin of this period in terms of the infrastructure required
to produce such an explosive growth of contributions to data visualization,  and found three primary
sources:  the systematic data collection by state agencies, the rise in popularity of statistical and visual
thinking, and the enabling developments of technological innovations.



Figure  2:  The  time  distribution  of  events  considered  milestones  in  the  history  of  data  visualization,
shown by a rug plot and density estimate.



2      The  Milestones  Project



Direction is more important than speed.  We are so busy looking at our speedometers
that we forget the milestone.                                                                               _Anonymous


     An early overview of the content and aims of the Milestones Project appeared in Friendly (2005).
Here we update that description and provide a few technical details on some problems that were en-
countered in attempting to make the history of data visualization convenient for collecting, browsing,
searching, and analysis.



                                                                   3
2.1      Origin, structure and evolution


The initial step in portraying the history of data visualization was to create a simple chronological listing
of milestone items with capsule descriptions, bibliographic references, markers for date, person, place,
and links to portraits, images, related sources and more detailed commentaries.  The initial database
contained the 105 developments listed by Beniger and Robyn (1978), and incorporated additional records
from Hankins (1999), Tufte (1983, 1990, 1997), Heiser (2000), among others.

     This began as a single LATEX file (with markup tags for all relevant bits of information),  used to
produce a hyper-linked PDF document.  A variety of software tools (perl scripts, Unix utilities) allowed
us to turn this single source directly into the web version originally shown at http://www.math.yorku.
ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone.  Other custom software tools allowed us to add new milestones items from
text files using a template of tags (DATE:,  AUTHOR:,  WHAT:,  REF:,  IMG:,  etc.)  and extract the
information about milestones items,  authors,  images,  etc.  in a variety of forms (CSV, XML, JSON)
that could be used as input for analyses and graphic displays.  For example, Figure 2 was produced in
SAS software by piping the output of a latex to csv translator:


itemdb  -o  milestones.csv  <  milestones.tex  |  sas  -i  milestones.csv  mileyears.sas


     It  soon  became  apparent  that  such  a  text-based  representation  was  inadequate.   Updating  the
milestones data required that the LATEX file be shared among several collaborators;  milestone assets,
such as images, web links and references, were not easily accessible by others, which made collaboration
cumbersome.  Further, each update to the web site required an inefficient number of steps of verification,
re-building, and synchronization with the server, meaning the website was often out of date.

     Around 2005, we began to make the process into a more dynamic one; to convert the flat file into a
relational database; create a Milestones administrative system and completely redesign the Milestones
web  site.   Specifically,  we  wanted  to  facilitate  contributions  by  any  number  of  trusted  collaborators
via an easy-to-use web administration area, and allow for the dissemination of milestones data via an
easy-to-browse public user interface.

     Migrating  the  data  to  this  format  provided  some  challenges.   First,  the  existing  milestones  data
needed  to  be  restructured  logically  and  have  redundancy  minimized.  To  do  this,  we  partitioned  the
data into its relevant entities: namely the milestone itself, and its descriptors, such as its aspect, author,
subject,  keywords,  reference,  and linked media items (such as images).  The aspect,  author,  subject,
keyword, and reference descriptors exist as a many-to-many relationship between it and the milestone.
For  example,  an  aspect  can  belong  to  one  or  more  milestones,  and  the  milestone  can  belong  to  one
or more aspects.  Media items,  on the other hand,  can only belong to one milestone at a time,  with
multiple media items possible for a single milestone.

     Figure 3 illustrates these relationships.  In this representation, the main table (milestone) contains
information regarding each of the items considered a milestone in the history of data visualization, linked
to other tables (e.g., reference, mediaitem) by unique (primary) keys.  Other supporting tables (e.g.,
milestone2aspect) provide for convenient lookups of descriptors of these milestones items (subject,
aspect, and keyword).



               Figure 3:  Simplified schema for the MySQL database for the Milestones Project.


     Normalizing the data in this way enabled us to free the database of modification anomalies; ensured
that the database structure was scalable, and could be extended with minimum modifications.  Most
importantly, it allows for future growth, and provides a query-neutral database model (Codd, 1971) that
could be used to power web presentation, and customized indexed search.  The last major benefit, which



                                                                   4
will be demonstrated in Section 3, is that this schema allows for any type of analysis of the Milestones

data itself.

     At  present,  the  Milestones  Project  documents  288  contributions,  with  nearly  350  references,  in-
formation  on  336  authors,  and  774  media  items,  made  up  of  371  images  appearing  online  on  the
http://datavis.ca/milestone site, and 403 hyperlinks to images and documents that are externally
hosted.  In addition, we maintain an offline image database comprising over 1,100 images collected from
various sources.  Over time, these too will be incorporated into the database.



2.2      User interface


The second challenge related to how to display such a large amount of information in an easy-to-use
interface  that  would  provide  overview,  search,  and  details  about  these  events  in  the  history  of  data
visualization.  We decided to retain the time-based grouping of the milestones content by epochs (Pre-
1600, 1600s, 1700s, etc.), each with a theme (e.g., 1600-1699: Measurement and Theory) and descriptive
text.  The visual design of the interface adopts Ben Shneiderman's mantra:  "Overview first, zoom and
filter, then details on demand" (Shneiderman, 1996).  To do this, we added a timeline view (Figure 4)
of the milestones items displayed on the overview landing page.  In this view,  the top panel shows a
detailed view of the segment of history highlighted in the bottom panel, both of which can be separately
scrolled.  Items in the top panel show a brief text tag, colour-coded by category.  Clicking on an item in
this panel brings up a small description, which is further linked to the details of the milestone item.



        Figure 4:  Timeline view of the Milestones Project from http://datavis.ca/milestone.


     This timeline, based on the SIMILE Timeline Widget (http://www.simile-widgets.org/timeline)
allows multiple connected time bands, showing events at different resolutions.  Each band can be sepa-
rately panned by dragging left or right with the mouse pointer, scroll wheel, or keyboard arrow keys.
The timeline view, although most obvious, is just one of several possibilities for a visual overview or in-
teraction with the display of the milestones database.  The software design of the site, using open-source
tool kits, makes it relatively simple to add new ones.  For example, the database can also be navigated
via a list view (with drop down quick links), and in Section 4.3 we will illustrate how it can be explored
using a map-based display.



3      Visualizing  Time  and  History



What does history look like?  How do you draw time?              _Rosenberg and Grafton (2010, p.  10)


     The questions in this quotation introduce an important topic in the history of data visualization:
how can such a history be visualized?  What methods might be called upon to detail the richness of its
past?4  Time provides an obvious dimension, but what else could be included in a static display that
might reveal a story previously hidden?  What kinds of dynamic or interactive displays might fascinate
and intrigue viewers?

     An annotated visual gallery of some timeline designs and visual histories can be found in our Data
Visualization  Gallery  at  datavis.ca/gallery/timelines.php.  The  topics  covered  include  early  vi-
sual  histories,  encyclopedic  charts,  special  purpose  charts,  correlated  histories  showing  events  in  one
domain in the context of events in other areas, non-linear scales for time and space, as well as dynamic,
interactive timelines.  Here we present a few inventive selections from this scholarship.
   _________________________________________________________4
     Another recent book, Visualizing Time (Wills, 2012), discusses a range of modern graphical methods for visualizing
time-based data.



                                                                   5
3.1      The first timelines, reconsidered


Although there are earlier precursors, the first timelines of modern design_ featuring a horizontal, linear
axis for time, and vertical positions for place, theme or category of events_ were produced in the mid
1700s.  Most notable of these prototypes were Jacques Barbeau-Doubourg's 1753 Carte Chronologique,
and Joseph Priestley's 1765 Chart of Biography.

     Priestley first published a small "Specimen" of this chart as a proof-of-concept, showing the lifespan
of famous men in the years 600 BC to 0 AD, classified as "statesmen" (from Solon to Augustus) and
"men of learning" (from Thales to Ovid).  Later that year, Priestly published a detailed version 1765
that  quickly  became  the  most  popular  and  influential  timeline  of  the  19th  century.  The  full  graphic
details the lifespans of more than 2,000 people from 1200 BC to 1750 AD, classified by their areas of
achievement (statesmen & warriors, mathematicians & physicians, artists & poets, and so on).

     Priestly's timeline charts can be seen on our Data Visualization Gallery,  and we don't reproduce
them here.  Instead we show (see Figure 5) a re-design, in his style, of the lifespans of 79 authors from
the Milestones database who were born in France or the United Kingdom between 1500 and 2000.



                      Figure 5:  A modern re-design of Priestley's 1765 Chart of Biography.


     Rosenberg and Grafton (2010, p.  117) called Priestley's charts "masterpieces of visual economy."
Indeed, they were at the time.  However, in his charts, the famous people were arranged haphazardly
within category groups, so it is difficult to find specific individuals, and nearly impossible to uncover
any trends, either over time or across categories.

     In  our  version,  authors  are  sorted  by  birth  year  within  each  country  and  the  names  are  printed
alternately at the year of birth and death.  The result, which resembles a cumulative distribution plot:
(a) allows easier visual lookup of names, (b) provides an overall "lifespan envelope," and, (c) highlights
a  few  individuals  who  lived  conspicuously  shorter  or  longer  than  their  contemporaries  (e.g.,  shorter:
Willam  Jevons,  James  Maxwell,  John  Snow,  and  Phillipe  Buache).   Of  course,  to  display  lifespan
directly  requires a different kind of plot, but one that would not have been even thinkable by Priestley
in 1765.  We return to this question in Section 4.2 (see Figure 10).



3.2      Universal histories


In addition to unrivalled thematic maps and statistical diagrams, the Golden Age of statistical graphics
also gave rise to a variety of novel attempts to visualize history in a comprehensive manner, combining
parallel,  intertwined  time-flows,  text,  illustrations,  maps,  and  other  visual  forms.   Among  the  most
impressive is the series of Synchronological Charts of Universal History produced by Sebastian Adams
between 1871-1885.  The 1881 version is 23 feet long and captures 5,885 years of history, from 4004 B.C.
to 1881 A.D. Rosenberg and Grafton (2010, p.  172) call it "nineteenth-century America's surpassing
achievement in complexity and synthetic power."  This graphic uses horizontal bands to trace devel-
opments in different countries, with detailed text describing significant events, and which break up or
merge according to political factors.

     Figure 6 shows the entire chart at the top (note the increasing visual density towards the right) and
a small portion below.  The entire chart can be viewed in high-resolution at http://www.davidrumsey.
com/blog/2012/3/28/timeline-maps.  Adams used a linear scale for time, and so it is understandable
why it took 23 linear feet to include all of recorded history.



                                                                   6
Figure 6:  Top:  The entirety of Sebastian Adams' Synchronological Chart of Universal History, 1881.

Bottom:  An excerpt detailing the 600-1100 AD period.



3.3      Categorization and non-linear scales


Linear time scales have the advantage that they provide uniform resolution and detail across the entire
time span, but events in time, or our interest in them are rarely uniformly distributed.  As exemplified
by the Milestones Project, most visual histories are rather sparse at their beginning and very crowded at
their end.  Utilizing non-linear scales can allow resolution to vary smoothly across the range, providing
greater detail in regions of interest, which are most often the recent past.5

     Figure  7  is  a  proof-of-concept  sketch  for  something  that  a  graphic  artist  could  use  as  a  starting
point for a chart of the history of data visualization.  It uses the events from the Milestones Project,
categorized  by  two  correlated  factors:   Subject  area,  in  which  the  content  has  been  categorized  as
dealing with human populations, physical properties of the world, or mathematics and statistics; and,
the  milestone's  aspect  or  form,  which  has  been  categorized  as  dealing  with  cartography,  graphs  and
diagrams, or technology.

     To provide greater resolution for more recent events, we have used a reverse square-root scale going
backward from the year 2000. Specifically,p`Year'_on_the horizontal time axis is actually plotted according
to the formula Year  ? = 2*(25-   (2000 - Year  )   ), giving the more pleasing result that the modern period
1800-2000 occupies about 60% of the scale, despite only comprising 40% of the range.  This is conveyed
visually by the spacing between tick marks on the X-axis.



Figure 7:  Sketch for a thematic timeline of milestones, 1500-present, categorized by the Subject (con-
tent) and Aspect (form) of the item.



4      Using  the  Milestones  Project  for  Statistical  Historiography



Vision is the art of seeing things invisible.                                               _Johnathan Swift, 1711



4.1      Statistical historiography


We use the term "statistical historiography,"  to refer to the use of statistical and graphical methods
to  explore,  study  and  describe  historical  problems  and  questions.6   This  topic  has  a  delightful  self-
referential quality when applied to the history of data visualization itself,  since we have often found
ourselves using modern methods of statistical analysis and graphics to study the development of ideas
in this area.  As in the quotation from Swift above, one goal is to make previously hidden aspects of
this history visible.
   _________________________________________________________5
     Of course, interactive graphics offer the possibity to vary resolution dynamically, by moving a "lens" across the display,
as in a hyperbolic viewer.
    6As far as we know, the initial expression of this idea appeared in a paper by Rubin (1943) discussing various ways

in which statistical methods could be applied to historical topics.  These included:  the use of sampling methods to test
historical theories; statistical distributions applied to historical data; and, the use of time series graphs with smoothed
curves to study historical trends. More recently, many examples of the application of these ideas to statistical topics can
be found in Stigler (1986, 1999), as well as our own papers on the history of data visualization, cited inter alia.



                                                                   7
     At the same time, our examination of some of the most impressive graphic works of the past some-

times left us awe-struck by their exquisite beauty and visual design.7  On more than one occasion when
looking at these elegant presentations, we wondered whether there wasn't something lost with the advent
of modern software.  While we can now analyze massive data sets, and generate a multitude of graphics
with  a  simple  mouse  click,  we  still  feel  that  designing  a  truly  effective  visual  display  of  information
requires thought and manual intervention.

     For this reason, it is often quite instructive to attempt to re-create or even re-vision a graphic work
from the past (Friendly, 2002b).  We can learn from this undertaking an appreciation for the insight
and hard labor of our graphic heros, and can sometimes better understand or improve on their designs
by a process we call "understanding through reproduction," another facet of statistical historiography.

     We illustrate this approach with an analysis of a graph from Playfair (1821),  shown in Figure 8,
in some ways a tour-de-force of early graphic presentation.  In this graph, Playfair used three parallel
time series in different forms to show the price of wheat (bar chart),  weekly wages (line graph),  and
reigning monarch (intervals) over a ~250 year span from 1565 to 1820.  His graphic goal was rhetorical:
he wished to argue that workers had become better off in the most recent years.  Surely this must be
counted among the best early data graphics.



Figure 8:  William Playfair's 1821 time series graph of prices,  wages,  and ruling monarch over a 250
year period.  Source:  Playfair (1821), image from Stephen Stigler.


     Yet, as we have argued elsewhere (Friendly and Denis, 2005), this graph is both sinful and a com-
munication failure for Playfair's purpose.  It is sinful because the use of separate y axes for wages (left
axis, range:  0-100) and prices (right axis, range:  0-30) on different scales provides the opportunity to
tell very different stories simply by re-scaling one or both axes.

     It  is  also  a  graphic  failure  because  the  visual  impression  that  wages  increased  relative  to  prices
toward the right end is at best indirect and is obscured by the large fluctuations in prices of wheat.
What  Playfair  might  have  done  to  show  the  relation  directly,  is  to  plot  the  ratio  of  price  to  wages,
representing the labor cost of a unit of wheat, as we have done in Figure 9.8  Adding a non-parametric
(loess) smoothed curve to the line plot makes Playfair's message directly apparent, and also shows that
the reduction in the amount of labor required to purchase one unit of week in fact levels off in the last
40 years.  As well, it highlights that something unusual happened around 1600.

     However,  in  order  to  conduct  such  statistical  historiography,  there  is  one  principal  requirement:
data.  The Milestones Project database is the repository of all the information we have so far recorded,
and  modern  database  tools  allow  the  possibility  of  simple  or  complex  queries,  limited  only  by  the
available  information.9   In  related  work,  we  have  collected  and  disseminated  data  sets  of  historical
interest  on  a  variety  of  topics  in  statistics  and  data  visualization,  for  instance  via  the  R  packages
HistData  (Friendly,  2011)  and  Guerry  (Friendly  and  Dray,  2010).  These  can  be  considered  another
source for data, pictures, and stories related to statistical historiography, and understanding through
reproduction.  This is the essence of the motto on the datavis.ca web site: Looking back, going forward.
   _________________________________________________________7
     Some examples are:  Charles Joseph Minard's famous depiction of Napoleon's March on Moscow (Friendly, 2002b),
Francis Galton's detailed study of weather patterns in Europe (see: Friendly, 2008b), and Andr'e-Michel Guerry's (Guerry,
1864, Plate 17) semi-graphic table depicting the relations of occurrence of crimes to a wide variety of social and demographic
factors (see: Friendly, 2007).
    8Playfair's data and this re-creation can be found in the R package HistData (Friendly, 2011) as example(Wheat).
    9It should be noted that, beyond the basics of recording milestones items, images and references, inputting the other

meta-data (content and form categories, keywords, etc.)  is highly labor-intensive.  Thanks are due to many research
assistants and graduate students who have and continue to work on the Milestones Project, including Dan Denis, Matt
Dubins, Yvonne Lai, Avi Lipton, and Carolina Patryluk.



                                                                   8




Figure 9:  Redrawn version of Playfair's time series graph showing the ratio of price of wheat to wages,
together with a loess smoothed curve.



     In the subsections below, we describe a few applications of these ideas using the Milestones Project
database and case studies that arose from this work.  There is an interesting interplay between such
historical analyses and these data collections.  Some studies called for us to find and incorporate new
data sources, such as our paper (Friendly, 2007) on Guerry's Moral statistics of France and the Guerry
package, to which we added Angeville's extensive 1836 data on social and economic characteristics of
France.  In other cases, our analyses suggested new or different ways to visualize historical data.



4.2      Milestone authors:  lifespan


As noted earlier, we record information relevant to the contributors of milestones events in an author
table in the database.  For most of these individuals, internet and biographical searches allowed us to
determine the dates and places of their birth and death.

     One simple question that can be posed using this information is how long did these contributors
live?  As illustrated earlier (see Figure 5), Joseph Priestley was the first to develop the idea of using
a graphic representation to show the lifespan of famous men.  His "charts of biography" did this in a
particularly evocative form,  representing each person by a line segment whose length was defined by
the individual's lifespan, and then grouped by occupational category.

     These "timespan" charts tell an interesting story, but they do not provide an answer to the question
of how long,  in general,  these individuals lived.  However,  with the author table from the Milestones
Project, it is a simple matter to calculate lifespan, and obtain a direct answer to this query.  Figure 10
shows one display of this information, using a combined density plot and rug plot, similar to the one
used in Figure 2.  On this graphic, individual observations are shown by a (jittered) rug plot along the
x-axis, and the three extreme cases on each end are identified by name.  The red vertical lines indicate
the quartiles of the distribution.



                                                                   9
Figure 10:  Density plot of the lifespan of the 172 authors in the Milestones Project database who were

born after 1500 and for whom lifespan can be determined.



     Several features of this plot deserve comment, and also invite further inquiry:  Most notable is that,
by and large, milestones authors generally lived to a ripe old age_ the median lifespan is 73.0, but the
density plot peaks at around 79.  This contrasts with a detailed study on famous people between 2400
BC to 1880 AD by David de la Croix and Omar Licandro (http://www.fcs.edu.uy/archivos/BCU_
clebrities.pdf).  In their research, it was found that the typical lifespan fluctuated around a mean
of 61 years for four millennia, and only gradually reached 69 toward the end of their sample.  Such a
discrepancy between the two studies might warrant further investigation; for instance, by classifying the
individuals into occupational, locational, or otherwise more delineated groups, and looking for trends.

     Another  interesting  feature  that  becomes  apparent  in  this  graphic  is  the  noticeable  bump  in  the
distribution around 45 years.  This occurrence calls for some attempt at further explanation.  We don't
pursue this here, but again note that such graphs often suggest further analyses (breakdowns by region
or time period), or cry out for the collection of more data.

     Finally, although Figure 10 is just a summary graph, we have labeled a few extreme observations
on each end, which may relate to telling parts of the story of the history of data visualization.  Among
these,  Henry  Moselely,  who  is  known  for  the  discovery  of  atomic  number  from  a  graphical  display,
died the youngest, as a consequence of serving in the British Army during World War I. But, we were
surprised to see the noted and prolific French cartographer Phillippe Buache, and the German physicist
and astronomer Johann Tobias Mayer, show up in positions two and three.  On the other end, we were
delighted  to  see  that  Adriano  Balbi,  a  Venetian  geographer  and  early  collaborator  of  Andr'e-Michel
Guerry  (Balbi  and  Guerry,  1829)  had  the  longest  lifespan,  just  exceeding  the  population  geneticist,
Sewall Wright, who invented path analysis and the path diagram around 1920.  By incorporating these
details, the visualization is able to reveal narratives that otherwise would have been concealed.



4.3      Milestone authors:  geography


The Milestones Project web site provides an initial page showing an interactive timeline of the events
in  this  history  as  a  visual  overview  (Figure  2).   A  long-term  goal  has  been  to  provide  other  views
of  this  history  and  other  tools  for  searching  and  exploring  the  database.   With  recent  technological
developments, it became evident to us that one such method would be through the use of geographical
data.

     So far, the primary geographic information we have encoded in the database refers to the birth and
death place of the milestone authors.  This is an imperfect representation, as these locations may not
accurately represent the author's primary residence.  For instance, Charles Joseph Minard was born in
Dijon, and died in Bordeaux, but all of his work was done in Paris while he worked at the 'Ecole Nationale
des Ponts et Chauss'ees. Nevertheless, a geographic view of the available information is potentially useful.
In this regard, we used the Google geocoding tools to provide latitude and longitude for the locations
listed in the author table.  Using this and the R package googleVis (Gesmann and de Castillo, 2011),
we created the interactive map shown in Figure 11.  Each geographic marker featured on the image is
linked to an author query on the datavis.ca web site, which lists the contributions of the individual
who was born at that location.



Figure 11:  Birth places of 188 milestone authors, shown on an interactive Google map, that has been
centred on France.



                                                                  10
     Like other instances of Google Maps, this graphic can be panned and zoomed using mouse controls.

The place markers display tool tips when hovered over and, when clicked, link to a search page that
details all of the Milestone items that are related to that author.  This interesting visualization will soon
be revealed on the Milestones Project website, with future work planned to incorporate other types of
data in addition to the birth and death locations.



4.4      Milestones:  themes and trends


The records in the Milestones Project database also feature various text fields for each logged event.
These include a brief item tag, a full description of the event, and relevant keywords, as well as categorical
codes for the content (Subject),  and form (Aspect) of the item.  Treating this information as "data"
allows us and others to study themes and trends in these developments.  Modern methods of text mining
and data visualization can provide insights into this history not available through other means.

     As one simple illustration of this approach, Figure 12 shows two mosaic displays10  that explore the
relationships among Epoch, Subject, and Aspect.  The left panel shows changes in the distributions of
milestone events by Subject over time. It can readily be seen that while most of the milestone innovations
up to the end of the 18th  century were about the physical world (astronomy,  geodetic measurement,
weather, etc.), this trend changed in the 19th  century, where there was a large shift toward problems
that related to human populations (e.g., pertaining to mortality, births, disease, crime).  Beginning in
the early 1900s, the pattern changes again, with advances in mathematics and statistics becoming the
dominating force.



Figure 12:  Mosaic displays for milestone items, with the marginal table showing differences in Subject
across Epochs (left) and for Subject across Aspect (right).  The number in each of the tiles is the count
of milestone items.


     The  right  panel  shows  the  association  between  Subject  and  Aspect,  pooled  over  Epoch.   As  is
not surprising, maps and other cartographical representations were most often used to show data of the
   _________________________________________________________10
     Mosaic displays show the frequencies in cells of a cross-classified table by the area of each tile.  The tiles are shaded
according to departure from a null model of no-association, using blue for cells with frequencies substantially greater than
chance, and red for cells with frequencies that are lower than expected.



                                                                  11
physical world, while graphs and diagrams were most often associated with mathematical and statistical

subjects.

     Other statistical graphs and analyses could be used to explore these and other relationships in more
detail.  The key to this is of course the existence and availability of data_ in this case reflected by the
coding of graphical milestones in our database.



5      Conclusion  and  Future  Directions



The Milestones Project began as a simple attempt to collect a comprehensive history of innovations and
developments in data visualization in a single, "one-stop shopping" location.  Like Topsy, it "just grew"
over time, with images, historical papers and references, suggestions, and other contributions graciously
provided by friends and collaborators, most notably from the members of Les Chevaliers des Albums
de Statistique Graphique.

     In this chapter, our primary goal was to introduce the second and latest iteration of this project.  The
redesign was undertaken to make this history more accessible for browsing and searching, and to attempt
to make the database more amenable to additions, edits, and extensions among collaborators.  However,
we find that the most exciting aspect of the new structure is its flexibility in terms of data retrieval,
and our newfound ability to use and manipulate the data for graphic-based statistical historiography.

     One  goal  for  the  future,  as  we  suggested  earlier  (Section  4.3),  is  to  extend  the  user  interface  to
provide multiple views and advanced text search and filtering capabilities.  One convenient path for this
development is provided by the SIMILE Exhibit framework (www.simile-widgets.org/exhibit3/).
This  provides  web  software  libraries  (Ajax,  javascript,  css)  for  timelines,  interactive  maps,  tabular
displays, image "tiles" and other visualizations.  Various views can be composed for browsing as tabbed,
alternatives or as faceted displays, showing, for example an interactive timeline and a map.

     Equally important, the Exhibit framework allows us to present some of the milestones tables to be
used as filters for the items displayed in these views.  Tables for subject,  aspect,  keywords,  location,
epoch, etc.  would allow the user to select select milestone events based on some or all of these criteria,
providing a way to ask such questions as "what milestones events between 1700-1900 involving social
science occurred in Europe?"

     Finally, we would like to make the milestones database more publicly accessible for use by others on
the history of data visualization.  For the examples we have shown here, we connect to the milestones
database  directly  via  MySQL  or  ODBC  interfaces  to  SAS  and  R,  but  this  presents  security  risks.
Happily, the Exhibit framework also provides methods for data export from various views, using JSON or
CSV formats. In addition, we contemplate adding facilities for users in the data visualization community
to add comments, notes, references and links to milestones items.  These extensions will comprise the
Milestones Project 3.0.



References


Balbi, A. and Guerry, A.-M. (1829).  Statistique compar'ee de l''etat de l'instruction et du nombre des
   crimes dans les divers arrondissements des acad'emies et des cours royales de France. Jules Renouard,
   Paris.  BL:Tab.597.b.(38); BNF: Ge C 9014 .


Beniger,  J.  R.  and  Robyn,  D.  L.  (1978).   Quantitative  graphics  in  statistics:  A  brief  history.   The
   American Statistician, 32, 1-11.



                                                                  12
Codd, E. F. (1971).  Further normalization of the data base relational model.  IBM Research Report,

   San Jose, California, RJ909.


Farebrother,  R.  W.  (1999).  Fitting  Linear  Relationships:  A  History  of  the  Calculus  of  Observations
   1750-1900.  New York:  Springer.


Friendly, M. (1994). Mosaic displays for multi-way contingency tables. Journal of the American Statis-
   tical Association, 89, 190-200.


Friendly, M. (2002a).  A brief history of the mosaic display.  Journal of Computational and Graphical
   Statistics, 11(1), 89-107.


Friendly, M. (2002b).  Visions and Re-Visions of Charles Joseph Minard.  Journal of Educational and
   Behavioral Statistics, 27(1), 31-51.


Friendly, M. (2005).  Milestones in the history of data visualization:  A case study in statistical histori-
   ography. In C. Weihs and W. Gaul, eds., Classification:  The Ubiquitous Challenge, (pp. 34-52). New
   York:  Springer.


Friendly,  M. (2007).  A.-M. Guerry's Moral Statistics of France:  Challenges for multivariable spatial
   analysis.  Statistical Science, 22(3), 368-399.


Friendly, M. (2008a). A brief history of data visualization. In C. Chen, W. H"ardle, and A. Unwin, eds.,
   Handbook of Computational Statistics:  Data Visualization, vol. III, chap. 1, (pp. 1-34). Heidelberg:
   Springer-Verlag.


Friendly, M. (2008b).  The Golden Age of statistical graphics.  Statistical Science, 23(4), 502-535.


Friendly, M. (2011). HistData:  Data sets from the history of statistics and data visualization. R package
   version 0.6-12.


Friendly, M. and Denis, D. (2001). Milestones in the history of thematic cartography, statistical graphics,
   and data visualization.  Web document.  http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/.


Friendly, M. and Denis, D. (2005). The early origins and development of the scatterplot. Journal of the
   History of the Behavioral Sciences, 41(2), 103-130.


Friendly, M. and Dray, S. (2010).  Guerry:  Guerry:  maps, data and methods related to Guerry (1833)
   "Moral Statistics of France".  R package version 1.4.


Friendly,  M.  and  Palsky,  G.  (2007).  Visualizing  nature  and  society.  In  J.  R.  Ackerman  and  R.  W.
   Karrow,  eds.,  Maps:  Finding  Our  Place  in  the  World,  (pp.  205-251).  Chicago,  IL:  University  of
   Chicago Press.


Friendly, M., Valero-Mora, P., and Ulargui, J. I. (2010).  The first (known) statistical graph:  Michael
   Florent van Langren and the "Secret" of Longitude.  The American Statistician, 64(2), 185-191.


Friis, H. R. (1974). Statistical cartography in the United States prior to 1870 and the role of Joseph C.
   G. Kennedy and the U.S. Census Office.  American Cartographer, 1, 131-157.


Funkhouser, H. G. (1936).  A note on a tenth century graph.  Osiris, 1, 260-262.


Funkhouser,  H. G. (1937).  Historical development of the graphical representation of statistical data.
   Osiris, 3(1), 269-405.  Reprinted Brugge, Belgium:  St. Catherine Press, 1937.



                                                                  13
Galton, F. (1886).  Regression towards mediocrity in hereditary stature.  Journal of the Anthropological

   Institute, 15, 246-263.


Gesmann, M. and de Castillo, D. (2011).  googleVis:  Interface between R and the Google Visualisation
   API.  R package version 0.2.12.


Guerry,  A.-M.  (1864).   Statistique  morale  de  l'Angleterre  compar'ee  avec  la  statistique  morale  de  la
   France,  d'apr`es les comptes de l'administration de la justice criminelle en Angleterre et en France,
   etc.  Paris:  J.-B. Bailli`ere et fils.  BNF: GR FOL-N-319; SG D/4330; BL: Maps 32.e.34; SBB: Fe 8586;
   LC: 11005911.


Hald, A. (1990).  A History of Probability and Statistics and their Application before 1750.  New York:
   John Wiley and Sons.


Hankins, T. L. (1999).  Blood, dirt, and nomograms:  A particular history of graphs.  Isis, 90, 50-80.


Hartigan, J. A. and Kleiner, B. (1981).  Mosaics for contingency tables.  In W. F. Eddy, ed., Computer
   Science and Statistics:  Proceedings of the 13th Symposium on the Interface, (pp. 268-273). New York,
   NY: Springer-Verlag.


Heiser,  W.  J.  (2000).  Early  roots  of  statistical  modelling.  In  J.  Blasius,  J.  Hox,  E.  de  Leeuw,  and
   P. Schmidt, eds., Social Science Methodology in the New Millenium:  Proceedings of the Fifth Inter-
   national Conference on Logic and Methodology. Amsterdam:  TT-Publikaties.


Hoff, H. E. and Geddes, L. A. (1959).  Graphic recording before Carl Ludwig:  An historical summary.
   Archives Internationales d'Histoire des Sciences, 12, 3-25.


Hoff, H. E. and Geddes, L. A. (1962).  The beginnings of graphic recording.  Isis, 53, 287-324.  Pt. 3.


Kruskal, W. (1977).  Visions of maps and graphs.  In Proceedings  of  the  International  Symposium  on
   Computer- Assisted Cartography, Auto-Carto II, (pp. 27-36).  1975.


Palsky, G. (1996). Des Chiffres et des Cartes: Naissance et d'eveloppement de la cartographie quantitative
   fran,caise au XIXe  si`ecle.  Paris:  Comit'e des Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques (CTHS).


Pearson, E. S., ed. (1978). The History of Statistics in the 17th and 18th Centuries Against the Changing
   Background of Intellectual, Scientific and Religeous Thought.  London:  Griffin & Co. Ltd.  Lectures
   by Karl Pearson given at University College London during the academic sessions 1921-1933.


Playfair, W. (1786). Commercial and Political Atlas: Representing, by Copper-Plate Charts, the Progress
   of the Commerce, Revenues, Expenditure, and Debts of England, during the Whole of the Eighteenth
   Century.  London:  Debrett; Robinson; and Sewell.  Re-published in Wainer, H. and Spence, I. (eds.),
   The Commercial and Political Atlas and Statistical Breviary, 2005, Cambridge University Press, ISBN
   0-521-85554-3.


Playfair, W. (1801). Statistical Breviary; Shewing, on a Principle Entirely New, the Resources of Every
   State and Kingdom in Europe. London: Wallis. Re-published in Wainer, H. and Spence, I. (eds.), The
   Commercial and Political Atlas and Statistical Breviary, 2005, CAmbridge, UK: Cambridge University
   Press, ISBN 0-521-85554-3.


Playfair, W. (1821). Letter on our agricultural distresses, their causes and remedies; accompanied with
   tables and copperplate charts shewing and comparing the prices of wheat, bread and labour, from
   1565 to 1821.  BL: 8275.c.64.



                                                                  14
Porter, T. M. (1986). The Rise of Statistical Thinking 1820-1900. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

   Press.


Priestley, J. (1765).  A Chart of Biography.  London:  (n.p.).  BL: 611.I.19.


Riddell, R. C. (1980). Parameter disposition in pre-Newtonain planetary theories. Archives Hist. Exact
   Sci., 23, 87-157.


Robinson, A. H. (1982).  Early Thematic Mapping in the History of Cartography.  Chicago:  University
   of Chicago Press.


Rosenberg, D. and Grafton, A. (2010).  Cartographies of Time:  A History of the Timeline.  New York:
   Princeton Architectural Press.


Royston, E. (1970). Studies in the history of probability and statistics, III. a note on the history of the
   graphical presentation of data.  Biometrika, 43, 241-247.  Pts. 3 and 4 (December 1956); reprinted In
   Studies in the History Of Statistics and Probability Theory, eds. E. S. Pearson and M. G. Kendall,
   London:  Griffin.


Rubin,  E.  (1943).  The  place  of  statistical  methods  in  modern  historiography.  American  Journal  of
   Economics and Sociology, 2(2), 193-210.


Shneiderman, B. (1996). The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations.
   In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, VL '96, (pp. 336-343). Washington,
   DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society.


Stigler, S. M. (1986).  The History of Statistics:  The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900.  Cam-
   bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Stigler, S. M. (1999).  Statistics on the Table:  The History of Statistical Concepts and Methods.  Cam-
   bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Tilling, L. (1975).  Early experimental graphs.  British Journal for the History of Science, 8, 193-213.


Tufte, E. R. (1983).  The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.  Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.


Tufte, E. R. (1990).  Envisioning Information.  Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.


Tufte, E. R. (1997).  Visual Explanations.  Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.


van Langren, M. F. (1644).  La Verdadera Longitud por Mar y Tierra.  Antwerp:  (n.p.).  Ii + 14 pp.,
   folio; BL: 716.i.6.(2.); BeNL: VB 5.275 C LP.


Wallis, H. M. and Robinson, A. H. (1987).  Cartographical Innovations:  An International Handbook of
   Mapping Terms to 1900.  Tring, Herts:  Map Collector Publications.


Wills, G. (2012). Visualizing Time:  Designing Graphical Representations for Statistical Data. Statistics
   and computing. New York:  Springer.



                                                                  15
